Add seed docs (#8294)
aws-amplify/docs: src/pages/[platform]/deploy-and-host/sandbox-environments/seed/index.mdx

import { getCustomStaticPath } from '@/utils/getCustomStaticPath';

export const meta = {
  title: 'Sandbox Seed',
  description:
    'Seed your sandbox with data to get started quickly.',
  platforms: [
    'android',
    'angular',
    'flutter',
    'javascript',
    'nextjs',
    'react',
    'react-native',
    'swift',
    'vue'
  ]
};

export const getStaticPaths = async () => {
  return getCustomStaticPath(meta.platforms);
};

export function getStaticProps(context) {
  return {
    props: {
      meta
    }
  };

}

The Sandbox Seed feature allows you to populate your Amplify sandbox environment with initial data, making it easier to test and develop your application with realistic data.

## Setting Up Your Seed Script

> To use the Sandbox Seed feature, you need to create a seed script. This script will be executed when you deploy your sandbox environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started, you need to create a seed script. This script will be executed when you deploy your sandbox environment and execute the `ampx sandbox seed` command.
```

1. Create a folder named `seed` under your `amplify` directory
2. Create a file named `seed.ts` inside the `seed` folder

```bash title="Folders" showLineNumbers={false}
amplify/
  └── seed/
      └── seed.ts

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

## Setting up required permissions

> To seed your sandbox environment, you will need to add the necessary permissions to your sandbox environment. Amplify will generate the necessary permissions which you can attach to your role currently containing `AmplifyBackendDeployFullAccess`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to seed your sandbox environment you will need to add the necessary permissions to your AWS profile user or execution role. Amplify will generate the necessary permissions which you can attach to your permission set or role currently containing `AmplifyBackendDeployFullAccess`.
```

      mutable: true,
    },
  },
  groups: ["admin"],
});
```

Create 2 secrets using `npx ampx sandbox secret set`

```bash title="Terminal" showLineNumbers={false}
npx ampx sandbox secret set username
npx ampx sandbox secret set password
```

Now to create a user and add to group `admin`, you can write the following script:

```typescript title="amplify/seed/seed.ts" 
import {
  addToUserGroup,
  createAndSignUpUser,
  getSecret,
} from "@aws-amplify/seed";
import { Amplify } from "aws-amplify";
// @ts-expect-error this file will not exist until sandbox is created
import outputs from "../../amplify_outputs.json";

Amplify.configure(outputs);

const username = await getSecret("username");
const password = await getSecret("password");

const user = await createAndSignUpUser({
  username: username,
  password: password,
  signInAfterCreation: false,
  signInFlow: "Password",
  userAttributes: {
    locale: "en",
  },
});

await addToUserGroup(user, "admin");
```

Run the seed script

```bash title="Terminal" showLineNumbers={false}
npx ampx sandbox seed
```

This will create a user with the username and password you provided and add them to the `admin` group.

> The `getSecret` function will fetch the secret you have created using `npx ampx sandbox secret set`. This is useful when you have a public repository and don't want to commit secrets to the repository. Alternatively, you can set the username and password directly as a `string` in the `createAndSignUpUser` function but we recommend using secrets to avoid exposing sensitive information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `getSecret` function will fetch the secret you created using `npx ampx sandbox secret set`. This allows you to avoid hardcoding credentials in your code. Alternatively, the username and password can be set directly as a `string` in the `createAndSignUpUser` function, but we highly recommend using `getSecret` to avoid exposing sensitive information in your repository.
```

> ### Auth with TOTP MFA

Author: added the MFA example with a callout similar to https://docs.amplify.aws/react/build-a-backend/auth/concepts/multi-factor-authentication/#configure-multi-factor-authentication

For example, if you would like to seed your auth with a user with TOTP MFA enabled, lets start by configuring the auth resource:

```typescript title="amplify/auth/resource.ts"
import { defineAuth } from "@aws-amplify/backend";

export const auth = defineAuth({
  loginWith: {
    email: true,
  },

  multifactor: {
    mode: "REQUIRED",
    totp: true,
  },
});
```

Now to create a user with TOTP MFA enabled, you can write the following script:

> For this example, we will use the `otpauth` library to generate TOTP codes.

Reviewer 3: This may make sense to have some where in the TOTP section (these are some warnings about odd behavior I noticed while testing, you can get around this by using an Authenticator App and customers may also figure out their own work arounds): 
Attempting to use the TOTP set up secret multiple times (for different TOTP instances) will thrown an error and entering the same 6-digit secret/passcode for both sign up and sign in (using it twice) will also give an error — have to wait for the initial passcode to expire.
EX: in scenarios where someone creates their user - which signs that user in - and later signs that user out to create more users, but signs in that user again, to manipulate data — if the same 6-digit passcode/secret is used for both sign ins (not waiting until previous passcode expires) an error is thrown

Author: https://github.com/aws-amplify/docs/pull/8294/files#diff-280a5a0c5ba64ed565d975945d5a1e64a080821785cd479619929936b0fb9a9dR460-R480

added this information into a section

  ```typescript
  const user = await createAndSignUpUser({
    username: 'username',
    password: 'password',
    signInAfterCreation: true,
    signInFlow: 'Password'
  });
  ```
  
  **MFA Support:**
  - Can be used with MFA by passing a `signUpChallenge` callback function to automate the response to MFA challenges
  - If no `signUpChallenge` is provided, SMS and EMAIL MFA will prompt for input via command line, while TOTP will throw an error
  - Each MFA type has its own challenge callback (e.g., `totpSignUpChallenge` for TOTP)
  - The `totpSignUpChallenge` receives a `totpSetup` argument to help set up TOTP devices
  - When MFA is set to "Optional" in a user pool, users will be sent through the Password flow

- **addToUserGroup** - Adds a user to an existing user group
  ```typescript
  await addToUserGroup(user, 'GroupName');
  ```

- **signInUser** - Signs in a user using their username, password, and sign-in flow
  ```typescript
  await signInUser({
    username: 'username',
    password: 'password',
    signInFlow: 'Password'
  });
  ```
  
  **MFA Support:**

>   - Can pass a `signInChallenge` callback to automate MFA responses

Author: added this info to the MFA handling section

});
// At this point, user1 is signed in

// Create second user
const user2 = await createAndSignUpUser({
    username: 'user2@example.com',
    password: 'Password123!',
    signInAfterCreation: true
});
// Now user2 is signed in, and user1 has been signed out

// Create third user without auto sign-in
const user3 = await createAndSignUpUser({
    username: 'user3@example.com',
    password: 'Password123!',
    signInAfterCreation: false
});
// No user is signed in, as user2 was signed out during user3's creation
// and user3 wasn't automatically signed in
```

**Important behaviors to note:**
- Setting `signInAfterCreation: true` will automatically sign in the newly created user and sign out any previously signed-in user.
- If `signInAfterCreation: false`, the user will not be signed in after creation
- Only one user can be signed in at a time

This behavior is particularly important when seeding multiple users in your application, as you'll need to carefully manage which user should be signed out at the end of your seeding process.

### MFA Challenge Handling

- For sign-up challenges, each MFA type has its specific challenge callback:
  - TOTP: `totpSignUpChallenge`

>   - Email: `emailSignUpChallenge`

Reviewer 3: may make sense to have `smsSignUpChallenge` here to avoid confusion, but I also see that it is listed with the other MFA `signUpChallenges` at the end so adding it here is not necessary

Author: updated the to also added the `smsSignUpChallenge` to the challenge callback list

    username: 'username',
    password: 'password',
    signInAfterCreation: true,
    signInFlow: 'Password',
    userAttributes?: StandardUserAttributes // Optional user attributes
  });
  ```

- **signInUser** - Signs in a user using their username, password, and sign-in flow
  ```typescript
  await signInUser({
    username: 'username',
    password: 'password',
    signInFlow: 'Password' | 'MFA',
    signInChallenge?: () => Promise<ChallengeResponse> // Optional for MFA
  });
  ```

- **addToUserGroup** - Adds a user to an existing user group
  ```typescript
  await addToUserGroup({
    username: 'username' // User to add to group
  }, 'GroupName');
  ```

### Additional APIs

The `@aws-amplify/seed` package additionally provides the following APIs:

- `AuthSignUp` - API for user sign-up configuration
- `AuthUser` - API for user authentication information
- `ChallengeResponse` - API for MFA challenge responses
- `StandardUserAttributes` - API for managing user attributes during sign-up
- `PasswordSignInFlow` - API for password-based authentication
- `MfaSignUpFlow` - API for MFA during sign-up
- `MfaSignInFlow` - API for MFA during sign-in

> - `MfaWithTotpSignUpFlow` - API for TOTP-specific MFA during sign-up

Author: updated the list

  ```typescript
  const secretName = await setSecret('secretName', 'secretValue');
  ```

### Auth APIs

Auth APIs allow you to create and manage users in your sandbox environment and are compatible with Amplify JS Auth APIs.

- **createAndSignUpUser** - Creates a user based on the properties passed in
  ```typescript
  const user = await createAndSignUpUser({
    username: 'username',
    password: 'password',
    signInAfterCreation: true,
    signInFlow: 'Password',
    userAttributes?: StandardUserAttributes // Optional user attributes
  });
  ```

- **signInUser** - Signs in a user using their username, password, and sign-in flow
  ```typescript
  await signInUser({
    username: 'username',
    password: 'password',
    signInFlow: 'Password' | 'MFA',
    signInChallenge?: () => Promise<ChallengeResponse> // Optional for MFA
  });
  ```

- **addToUserGroup** - Adds a user to an existing user group
  ```typescript
  await addToUserGroup({
    username: 'username' // User to add to group
  }, 'GroupName');
  ```

### Additional Types

The `@aws-amplify/seed` package provides these essential types:

- `AuthSignUp` - Type for user sign-up configuration

> - `AuthUser` - Type for user authentication information

Reviewer 3: Overall this looks great! :D 
I have one small nit, what `AuthUser` is used for may be clearer if it is described as `Type for signing in users` or `Type for user sign in` instead of `Type for authentication information`

```bash title="Terminal" showLineNumbers={false}
aws iam put-role-policy --role-name <your-role-name> --policy-name <policy-name> --policy-document file://seed-policy.json
```

{/* aws cli call to update SSO user permission set*/}

## Writing your seed script

Once your permissions are set up, you can write your seed script. The `@aws-amplify/seed` package provides a set of API's to help you seed your sandbox environment. 

### Auth

For example, if you like to seed your auth with a user and add them to the `admin` group, lets start by creating an auth resource:

```typescript title="amplify/auth/resource.ts" 
import { defineAuth } from "@aws-amplify/backend";

export const auth = defineAuth({
  loginWith: {
    email: true,
  },
  userAttributes: {
    locale: {
      required: false,
      mutable: true,
    },
  },
  groups: ["admin"],
});
```

Create 2 secrets using `npx ampx sandbox secret set`

```bash title="Terminal" showLineNumbers={false}
npx ampx sandbox secret set username
npx ampx sandbox secret set password
```

Now to create a user and add to group `admin`, you can write the following script:

```typescript title="amplify/seed/seed.ts" 

> import {
>   addToUserGroup,
>   createAndSignUpUser,
>   getSecret,
> } from "@aws-amplify/seed";
> import { Amplify } from "aws-amplify";
> import { readFile } from 'node:fs/promises';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import { readFile } from "node:fs/promises";
import {
  addToUserGroup,
  createAndSignUpUser,
  getSecret,
} from "@aws-amplify/seed";
import { Amplify } from "aws-amplify";
```

### Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA)

Amplify seed supports multiple types of MFA including TOTP (Time-based One-Time Password), Email, and SMS. Below are examples of how to implement MFA in your seed script.

### Auth with TOTP MFA

For example, if you would like to seed your auth with a user with TOTP MFA enabled, lets start by configuring the auth resource:

```typescript title="amplify/auth/resource.ts"
import { defineAuth } from "@aws-amplify/backend";

export const auth = defineAuth({
  loginWith: {
    email: true,
  },

  multifactor: {
    mode: "REQUIRED",
    totp: true,
  },
});
```

To create and sign in a user with TOTP MFA enabled, you can write the following script:
For this example, we will use the `otpauth` library to generate TOTP codes.

```bash title="Terminal" showLineNumbers={false}
npm install otpauth
```

```typescript title="amplify/seed/seed.ts"

> import {
>   ChallengeResponse,
>   createAndSignUpUser,
>   getSecret,
> } from "@aws-amplify/seed";
> import { Amplify } from "aws-amplify";
> import * as auth from "aws-amplify/auth";
> import * as otpauth from "otpauth";
> import { readFile } from 'node:fs/promises';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import { readFile } from "node:fs/promises";
import {
  ChallengeResponse,
  createAndSignUpUser,
  getSecret,
} from "@aws-amplify/seed";
import { Amplify } from "aws-amplify";
import * as auth from "aws-amplify/auth";
import * as otpauth from "otpauth";
```

    return await challengeWithTOTP(totpSetup);
  },
});

console.log(`User ${user.username} was created`);

// Wait for a moment to get a fresh TOTP code
await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 35000));

const signIn = await signInUser({
  username,
  password,
  signInFlow: "MFA",
  signInChallenge: async () => {
    const answer = generateTOTPCode(totpSecret);
    return { challengeResponse: answer };
  },
});

console.log(`User was signed in: ${signIn}`);

auth.signOut();
```

This will create a user with the username and password with TOTP MFA enabled. The TOTP code is generated using the `otpauth` library. The user will then be signed in and the TOTP code will be generated.
The timeout ensures the previous TOTP code expires before generating a new code for sign-in. This prevents potential conflicts that could occur if the same TOTP code were used for both user creation and authentication.

Run the seed script

```bash title="Terminal" showLineNumbers={false}
npx ampx sandbox seed
```

### Auth with Email MFA

For example, if you would like to seed your auth with a user with Email MFA enabled:

```typescript title="amplify/seed/seed.ts"

> import {
>   createAndSignUpUser,
>   getSecret,
>   signInUser
> } from "@aws-amplify/seed";
> import { Amplify } from "aws-amplify";
> import * as auth from "aws-amplify/auth";
> import { readFile } from 'node:fs/promises';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import { readFile } from "node:fs/promises";
import {
  createAndSignUpUser,
  getSecret,
  signInUser
} from "@aws-amplify/seed";
import { Amplify } from "aws-amplify";
import * as auth from "aws-amplify/auth";
```

To take advantage of this feature with an Amplify generated backend, the underlying CDK construct can be extended manually. See [overriding Cognito User Pool multi-factor authentication options](/[platform]/build-a-backend/auth/modify-resources-with-cdk/#override-cognito-userpool-multi-factor-authentication-options) for more information.
</Callout>

### Data

For example, if you like to seed your Data API, lets start by creating a GraphQL API with a `Todo` model with authorization mode set to `userPool`:

```typescript title="amplify/data/resource.ts"
import { a, defineData, type ClientSchema } from "@aws-amplify/backend";

const schema = a.schema({
  Todo: a
    .model({
      content: a.string(),
      isDone: a.boolean(),
    })
    .authorization((allow) => [allow.authenticated()]),
});

export type Schema = ClientSchema<typeof schema>;

export const data = defineData({
  name: "TodoApi",
  schema,
  authorizationModes: {
    defaultAuthorizationMode: "userPool",
  },
});
```

Now to seed your todo table with a todo, you can write the following script:

```typescript title="amplify/seed/seed.ts"

> import { getSecret, signInUser } from "@aws-amplify/seed";
> import { Amplify } from "aws-amplify";
> import * as auth from "aws-amplify/auth";
> import type { Schema } from "./../data/resource";
> import { generateClient } from "aws-amplify/api";
> import { readFile } from 'node:fs/promises';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import type { Schema } from "./../data/resource";
import { readFile } from "node:fs/promises";
import { getSecret, signInUser } from "@aws-amplify/seed";
import { Amplify } from "aws-amplify";
import * as auth from "aws-amplify/auth";
import { generateClient } from "aws-amplify/api";
```

    username: 'user3@example.com',
    password: 'Password123!',
    signInAfterCreation: false
});
// No user is signed in, as user2 was signed out during user3's creation
// and user3 wasn't automatically signed in
```

**Important behaviors to note:**
- Setting `signInAfterCreation: true` will automatically sign in the newly created user and sign out any previously signed-in user.
- If `signInAfterCreation: false`, the user will not be signed in after creation
- Only one user can be signed in at a time

This behavior is particularly important when seeding multiple users in your application, as you'll need to carefully manage which user should be signed out at the end of your seeding process.

### User Management Between Multiple Runs of Seed

Seed attempts to create a new user for every instance of `createAndSignUpUser` every time it is run. 
You may want to use the same user(s) over multiple runs of seed. In this case, using this would avoid any errors that may arise from `createAndSignUpUser` attempting to create duplicate users:

```typescript title="amplify/seed/seed.ts"
const username = await getSecret('username');
const password = await getSecret('password');

> try{
>   const user = await createAndSignUpUser({
>     username: username,
>     password: password,
>     signInFlow: 'Password',
>     signInAfterCreation: true
>   });
> } catch(err) {
>     const error = err as Error;
>     if(error.name === 'UsernameExistsError') {
>         await signInUser({
>             username: username,
>             password: password,
>             signInFlow: 'Password',
>         });
>     }
>     else {
>         throw err;
>     }
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
try {
  const user = await createAndSignUpUser({
    username: username,
    password: password,
    signInFlow: 'Password',
    signInAfterCreation: true
  });
} catch (err) {
  const error = err as Error;
  if (error.name === 'UsernameExistsError') {
    await signInUser({
      username: username,
      password: password,
      signInFlow: 'Password'
    });
  } else {
    throw err;
  }
}
```
